Array boundary (#900)
hyperledger-labs/solang: docs/optimizer.rst

The expression `a*b` is repeated throughout the function and will be saved to a temporary variable.
This temporary will be placed wherever there is an expression `a*b`. You can see the pass in action when you compile
this contract and check the CFG, using `solang --emit cfg`.

.. _Array-Bound-checks-optimizations:

Array Bound checks optimization
-------------------------------

Whenever an array access is done, there must be a check for ensuring we are not accessing
beyond the end of an array. Sometimes, the array length could be known. For example:

.. code-block::

    contract c {
    
        function test() public returns (int256[]) {
            int256[] array = new int256[](3);
            array[1] = 1;
            return array;
        }
    }

In this example we access ``array`` element 1, while the array length is 3. So, no bounds
checks are necessary and the code will more efficient if we do not emit the bounds check in
the compiled contract.

> The array length is tracked in an invisible a temporary variable. This temporary variable is always kept up to date when, for example, a ``.pop()`` or ``.push()`` happens on the array

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The array length is tracked in an invisible a temporary variable, which is always kept up to date when, for example, a ``.pop()`` or ``.push()`` happens on the array
```

Reviewer: @salaheldinsoliman You marked this as resolved, but the text has not changed.

        }
        
        return sesa;
        }

> }

Reviewer 2: Please improve the formatting of the example.

> or an assignment is done. Then, when the bounds check is done, rather than retrieving the array length from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or an assignment is done. Then, when the bounds check happens, rather than retrieving the array length from
```

The expression `a*b` is repeated throughout the function and will be saved to a temporary variable.
This temporary will be placed wherever there is an expression `a*b`. You can see the pass in action when you compile
this contract and check the CFG, using `solang --emit cfg`.

.. _Array-Boundary-checking-optimizations

Array Boundary checking optimizations
---------------------------------

When an array boundary check is needed, Solang calls a builtin ArrayLength function, which is translated, under the hood, to multiple LLVM-IR instructions that are expensive and unnecessary if the array's size is known.
This optimization is done by inserting temporary variables to hold array lengths, and updating them during array pops and pushes. It works for dynamic arrays allocated with constant or variable size.

Check out the example below.

.. code-block:: solidity

    contract c {
        function test_for_loop() public returns (uint) {
            uint256[] a = new uint256[](20);
            a.push(1);
            uint sum = 0;

            for (uint i = 0; i < a.length; i++) {
                sum = sum + a[20];
            }

            return sum;
        }
    }

> Here, we have a for loop that runs for 21 iterations. In each iteration, we need to calcule the length of the array two times: the first for the loop boundary and the second for the array boundary check.
> that is a total of 42 calculations for the array length.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, we have a for loop that runs for 21 iterations. In each iteration, we need to calculate the length of the array twice: for the loop boundary and for the array boundary check. This sums up to a total of 42 calculations for the length.
```

> Instead, we introudce a temporary variable to hold the array length. this variable will be incremented after the push in line 2 to hold the value 21.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, we introduce a temporary variable to hold the array length. This variable is incremented after the push in line 2 to hold the value 21.
```

Reviewer: @salaheldinsoliman Don't forget about this.

> Therefore, array and loop boundary checks will be comparisons between number literals, which are a lot cheaper than calculating array length each time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, array and loop boundary checks will be comparisons between number literals, which are a lot cheaper than retrieving the array length each time.
```
The array length is not calculated. We keep track of it in a variable.

The expression `a*b` is repeated throughout the function and will be saved to a temporary variable.
This temporary will be placed wherever there is an expression `a*b`. You can see the pass in action when you compile
this contract and check the CFG, using `solang --emit cfg`.

> .. _Array-Bound-checks-optimizations:

Reviewer 2: Only one blank line need here

Array Bound checks optimization
-------------------------------

Whenever an array access is done, there must be a check for ensuring we are not accessing
beyond the end of an array. Sometimes, the array length could be known. For example:

.. code-block::

    contract c {
    	function test() public returns (int[]) {
    		int[] array = new int[](3);
    		array[1] = 1;
    		return array;
	}

>     }

Reviewer 2: The formatting of the example is messy

    
In this example we access ``array`` element 1, while the array length is 3. So, no bounds

> checks are necessary and code will more efficient if we do not emit the bounds check in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
checks are necessary and the code will more efficient if we do not emit the bounds check in
```

the compiled contract.

> The array length is tracked in an invisible a temporary variable. This temporary variable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The array length is tracked in an invisible a temporary variable. This temporary variable is
```

> always kept up to date, when for example a ``.pop()`` or ``.push()`` happens on the array

Reviewer: ```suggestion
always kept up to date when, for example, a ``.pop()`` or ``.push()`` happens on the array
```

or an assignment is done. Then, when the bounds check is done, rather than retrieving the array length from
the array at runtime, bounds check becomes the constant expression `1 < 3` which is

> always true, so the bounds check is omitted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
always true, so the check is omitted.
```

This also means that whenever the length of an array accessed using `.length`, this is

> replaced with a constant.

Reviewer: This whole phrase is unclear and needs rewriting.

Reviewer: `As a consequence of this, whenever the length of an array is accessed using '.length', we can replace the corresponding builtin call with a constant.`

> Note that this optimization does not cover every case, like when an array is passed in
> via a function argument for example, which means the length is unknown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that this optimization does not cover every case. When an array is passed
as a function argument, for instance, the length is unknown.
```
